So want to welcome everybody. Uh as you
know this is the uh tri board meeting.
It is uh
required by the charter. It's a new
addition uh that we must confer with the
board of finance must confer with the
board of ed and the board of selectment
uh by October 15th with respect to the
uh to the budget. Um so we've got an
agenda that outlines that today. It's
fairly open but that is our topic today
to talk about budget planning. Uh so
we'll need to stay on topic those items.
>> Okay. Um I'm going to call the meeting
to order at the
704 roughly. So welcome everybody. We'll
stay the pledge of allegiance.
Pledge allegiance to the flag of the
United States of America and to the
republic for it stands one nation under
God indivisible with liberty and justice
for all.
Um so uh just as we did before in our
last tribe board meeting we have asked
an independent person to act as
moderator. So that has
agreed to be moderator and I'm going to
go ahead and turn the meeting over to
them.
Okay. Um
first thing we did last time and and I'd
like to do again is we just went around
the room and introduced ourselves. So,
if we could start with Eric and work
around and then we'll we'll hear from
who the public is to wrap up. That'll
get us started tonight.
>> Okay. My name is Eric Anderson and
currently I'm the town administrator.
>> Bill D. Rogers. I'm on the board of
finance.
>> Uh Mark Ricker, chair of the board of
finance for about one week.
>> Joanne Heber, um vice chair of the board
of finance for a couple more meetings.
Robin, board of finance.
>> Jed Larson, moderator and planning and
zoning chair. Uh Jeff Mcguire for
assignment.
>> Kimberly, board of finance. Liz Lopez,
board of finance.
>> Louis Goodwin, board of finance.
>> What's your name?
>> That's Jacob.
Finance, too.
>> Yeah. Terry, can we go across the back
door, please?
>> Terry Smith, finance director for
Andover Elementary School. Valerie
Berno, superintendent, Andover
Elementary School.
>> Linda Fish, president of Andover.
>> Elaine Bookart, I wear a lot of hats,
but right now I'm just recording this
meeting.
>> Bob Hamburger, Thorn and all your sides.
>> Marcy Miner, Andover President.
Diane Grer, concerned citizen.
>> Thank you. I just want to point out for
the record that I thought Linda said uh
president of Andover. Oh,
>> you can have it.
>> I wouldn't want that.
>> You can have it.
>> So, first item, first item on the agenda
is the public speak. Anybody from the
public like comment at this point?
>> Marcy,
>> I'm wondering if this is a tri board
meeting. It seems a little shallow.
I don't see anyone from the board of ed
and one person from the selectment.
>> Is there a requirement for a quorum?
>> This is an odd meeting. So, we have more
um board of selectmen. Jeff Murray had
sat there and said that he was not going
to be attending. Uh he sat there and
said he had other commitments. Scott
Persona is sick tonight. So, I did not
hear anything from May or Carol. So, I'm
just letting you know. And as far as the
board of education, I know we heard from
Caitlyn.
>> Yeah, Caitlyn agreed to come any of the
three nights,
>> but she couldn't come tonight.
>> And then something came up and now
>> No, she listen Caitlyn had a birthday
party for her son. I get it. and all the
rest of the members.
>> There was only one other member that had
planned on being here and they have had
a medical emergency tonight.
>> Okay. And that's that answers that
>> just for for procedural purposes. This
really is I think a board of finance
meeting. So we have tomorrow I think we
can consider that and we need to hold
the meeting perfectly for the charter.
Any
other public comment?
Okay, we'll go on to the next item which
is the board of finance outline and
revised budget process and timeline and
draft plan.
I guess I go ahead and address that
overall give summary.
>> Okay. Okay. Um so uh you have uh printed
form here. This has also been
distributed to the board of selective
and the board of finance um and the
board of ed. So this is a proposed
uh outline of the uh uh budget uh
process and primarily the the budget um
uh timeline. So starting on October 15th
we're having this tri board meeting uh
for the charter. This is required. Um
I'm just going to read through this for
the record. Uh the week of December 1st,
uh budget worksheets go out to the uh
department heads, chairs, outside
agencies,
um with the target of returning those
worksheets uh in the within the town.
This is the town budget uh primarily
return those uh completed worksheets to
the town administrator's office. Okay.
Um some details there. Uh the town
administrator will distribute the draft
budget workbook for the uh general and
capital budgets ready for the board of
finance and board of selectment by
February 2nd. Okay. Uh the date here
stated is the board of education to
submit budget to the board of finance.
Okay.
So there's a note here that this is
required. I think it's the term, you
know, in terms of the charter, I noticed
that it falls on a Sunday this year
often because it says x amount of days
before uh before the end of the year
fiscal year.
Um February, March starting Wednesday,
February 4th, meeting weekly. This gives
the board of selectman, board of finance
uh several working meetings uh before
the April 4th public hearing. So we
would need to uh we hold a series
offormational meetings
Okay.
Um it's March 18th for finance. We have
to vote by then to send uh the meeting
to schedule the public hearing. Uh we've
got the public uh hearing uh scheduled
for April 1st.
That's tentative, but it's a good target
date given the time constraints for the
annual top budget meeting. And per the
charter, the annual meeting must be the
second week of April between April 7th
and April 11th. I think that this is
actually April 6th through April 10th if
you go Monday through Friday. So I think
these dates are actually incorrect.
>> That is 6th through the 10th.
>> 6th through.
>> So yeah, this is again informal, but we
would put this in there. Um and then the
with the target of the uh townwide
budget referendum and the RAM referendum
on May 5th, 2026. Okay. Um I'll just
note here that I did get a request from
Caitlyn uh the board of ed uh chair that
uh the Wednesday went to April 8th does
conflict with the board of ed meeting
and she wanted to be able to move it. Um
so that would certainly be under
consideration. I think if we did I
traditionally we've had it on a Tuesday
or Wednesday or Tuesdays were kind of
kept their mind uh but we did uh have it
last week last year thing and co
coincided with a board of ed meeting of
course which causes some scheduling
issues. So this is a proposed schedule.
Um in general we need to follow this
outline pretty closely. A lot of these
dates are prescribed by the charter at
least in terms of the number of dates we
must complete them by in advance of the
town meeting and the fiscal year.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> I had a thought like I just interject um
about the first vote uh and then the
second December 1st the week December
5th. Um, as many of you know, Eric is
leaving us. Um, typically he would send
those out to the department heads,
right? The the requests for their
preliminary budgets. Uh, and that's two
weeks after he leaves.
>> Correct. Uh, finance department is well
aware of that deadline. And, uh, Chris
Harky, Per Kelly, we'll get those out
to the department at some time.
>> Cool.
Yep. We'll make sure that that gets
done. And so since you announced it,
Eric just turned in his resignation.
And so I can't tell you how upsetting
that is to me and what a loss it is for
the community. So I hope everybody
understands that that it's a significant
loss to the community that Eric is
leaving. Great for Eric because he's
going to another rural place and a place
he'll enjoy and he's gonna get paid a
lot more money. So, congratulations Eric
and thank you for everything.
Um, back to your list, the board of
education did request that that date be
changed. So, I recommend that the board
of finance change it to the 7th of the
9th. we will make sure that everything
gets out on time. We we have a board
like meeting to sit there and work
through Eric's
resignation. And um one other thing that
the board of education asked is that
they asked for time before the town
meeting for specific questions and
answers related to their budget. And let
let everybody understand here at this
meeting, the board of education is
sitting up front with us. This is a town
budget. It's everybody
There will not be and I don't care who
sets up the room, the board of education
will be there. They deserve to be there.
They deserve to answer questions. They
deserve to to deal with the issues
there. So if it doesn't get done and
anyone shows up to that meeting, they
have tables. We we need to all be up
there, every one of us.
>> Great. Okay. So please accommodate the
board of education and the request move
that meeting be June 32 Tuesday. Yeah.
>> Um, do you have any idea whether you
have a preference on 7th or the 9th?
>> It's Tuesday or Thursday
before or after the board of ed meeting.
>> This is April, right?
>> Yeah. I mean, we don't need the answer
right now. We'll we'll probably try to
finalize the schedule in our board of
finance meeting next week.
>> I would say the 9th.
>> The 9th.
>> Yes.
>> Understand? The Thursday.
>> That is a Thursday.
>> All right. If you want to check with the
board and or I can send an email to
Kate, we can we can uh just validate
that.
Shannon,
>> you know, we don't we don't have to
write it in stone. If we decide on that
schedule, we can change it if we need
to, but obviously planning purposes.
Just here to get that out there. Okay.
>> Okay. Any other questions on the uh
budget process and the timeline?
I would just make a statement if I
could. Um, last year was the first year
that we put this into play. Um,
and a lot of the things that are on
here, it is, you know, it's aggressive
compared to what we did in the past as
far as having a lot of meetings and
having a lot of input. I mean, nothing's
going to change. I mean, with all the
changes that you just announced and the
changes, Eric, am I correct? Did I hear
I joined the board of selection meeting
late but did Cheryl hand in her
resignation to the treasurer?
>> She did.
>> Okay.
>> I just asking a question. I mean I
didn't know.
>> So she will not be involved in the
budget process and putting the
spreadsheet together and all of those
kind of things.
>> Uh she will not. You'll get the initial
spreadsheet from Chris Herrick Kelly or
you'll do it yourself as a board of
finance
group.
>> Yeah, I mean it'll it'll be up to the
board of course. And then I know that
there were issues and different
selectment had said things that they
wanted done. you know, since we're
talking about the process, it's not for
me to say that, you know, just to, you
know, a couple mistakes were made and
people have preferences of how they want
the spreadsheet presented, but
it'll just I'm just putting it out there
in a public meeting. It'll be a
difficult year with new people on board
with the announcement that was just made
and, you know, other people handling
those things, but there'll be a lot of
bias on it, I'm sure.
just this was already hard to me from
being on the board four years and really
liking the timeline you used to have a
little bit pushed back just to have some
time to digest it but
>> that's all I mean and then the beginning
meetings are supposed to be kind of
collaborative between the board of
select men and the board of finance I
know I think we had one member of the
board of selectmen Jeff came to our
first meeting. Perhaps there was others.
That's just from memory. Is this year
the process going to be possibly a
little different with having more
members present?
>> I'm going to be attending all of your
meetings.
>> Yeah.
>> Just like I'm doing with the board of
education, I'm going to be attending the
board of finance meeting.
>> I think that's
>> as an ex official member, non voting,
but fully participating.
>> That's awesome.
>> It helped me to go to all of the
meetings so that I heard things and the
ladies do too. Kim and Liz are always
present. It just helped, right? Didn't
it help with the process?
>> Yep. Yeah. No, I love that. Thank you.
>> Okay. Next item on the agenda is
expectations from the board of finance
and the other two
potential spending targets.
>> Okay. Um I guess I got to address that.
That was pretty straightforward. We did
uh have a vote. This is a non-binding
recommendation. Of course, each board
has to come up with their own uh budget.
Uh but it is our uh uh proposed
uh expenditure limit that you not
increase the current expenditures more
than one 1.5%
of the current expenditures for fiscal
year 26 27.
So we know that's fairly aggressive but
u you know that's
a reasonable party.
Any questions on that item?
Okay, I'm going to move down to item
four. Board of Education Superintendent
identify major items that affect future
costs in the 2627 budget year and
projecting the next five years.
Demographic input.
>> Yeah, I need one
space. Oh, it's okay.
Okay.
>> So, just because I know we want to make
sure we stay on the top of this part, um
I have a few notes here that I'm going
to refer to and I did copy them. This
isn't anything official. This is just
Val's notes on the bottom there, but I
know that some people are visual
learners. And so, um if I'm referring to
something, I wanted you to have that in
front of you to be able to refer to. So,
don't hold me any mistakes that are in
there. Um it's just I think I have
another seven. Um it's just that
I know that this is our opportunity. I
talk about
talk about things that are
drivers. And so while we were all
together
um while we were all together, I was a
little surprised that we um
or talk about Target before this um
there's a few things that I I would like
us to just be able to talk about
together. Um going into this budget
season, um I've been here six years and
I know that sometimes during the course
of the budget season, things get a
little bit um skewed in terms of what
real numbers are, what aren't real
numbers are. So I've tried to really put
this together so that I am speaking to
all of the real numbers. Um so the
difficulty is that we I've been here
since 2019 2020. Um
we also
I want to say we have a a
a habit as a town sometimes of making it
seem like when we're looking at the
budget numbers, we're comparing apples
to apples when it comes to the school
and when it comes to the town. And I
want to show you a few ways that we have
to kind of hopefully open up and look at
that a little bit differently. So, I've
listed here the Andover Elementary
budget increases and the town budget
increases for the past six years. Um, it
helps to explain, I think, a little bit
why the school winds up sometimes with
very different needs during budget
season to accommodate um the
specific facts
surrounding our increase. So the first
one for example you can see we were at a
negative4% in 2020. Um in 2020 when I
got here there had been a reduction in
students. How did they make it through
that year? Well that was the school year
where they closed in March due to co so
they would have not been able at the end
of the year to necessarily accommodate
all of their expenditures but they did
close in March. There was there was a
great deal of savings with closing in
March. You see the other ones there, the
zero, the three to four. I don't have to
read the individual ones. Two and five.
On the town side, there were other
needs. There were absolutely other
needs. They went from two to one to 5 to
two to a 15% increase and then uh down
two points. So when we're talking about
why the school would have a really hard
time accommodating such a low target, we
do have to consider the fact that over
the last six years. Um we've seen over
six years a 12% increase over the course
of six years with an average of two then
per year and we have been able to
accommodate 26.77%
increase on the town side. And so
because of that um I think there's a lot
of things expenditures that haven't been
considered on the school's side. If you
look at numbers here on the bottom
solely because I believe that during
budget season oftentimes we do have some
residents that will say school is
overfunded, the school is overfunded.
And I want to be able to make sure that
people understand that that that is a
little bit of a misnomer. And I'm going
to show you three other things in here.
It shows you from 2019 to 2025, there
has been over the course of those six
years $500,000 increase to the school's
budget. On the town side, the increase
has been 886,000.
So, we do recognize as a town very
oftent times that the needs are not the
same from one side to the other. So, we
do we do we do do that on a regular
basis.
On the next page, I have minimum budget
requirement. And I would like the board
of finance to be able to speak to that
this year when we go into our town
meeting. Um, if you don't know what
minimum budget requirement is, um, and I
know a lot of you do, but some people
don't, minimum budget requirement is the
state's ED12. And it takes into
consideration the average school. This
been in effect since the 1970s. It says
unless a town has a loss of a school,
you close the school or you have a
significant decrease in the number of
students, it requires local
municipalities to at the very minimum,
at the very bare bones minimum, keep
your budget the same. And we haven't
talked about that a lot. And so as we go
into budget season, if we could talk
about that, that at least is always off
the table then. and we wouldn't have
people misinformed.
Um, I' I've put in some into my notes
here, you know, just some ways that
people could look that up if they want
to, but minimum budget requirement, it
it does have municipalities budgeting
less for local board of education than
it did the year before. So, that's like
always the starting point then for a
town. Um,
the only change can be we've had like a
significant loss of students. So if you
look at the bottom of our MBR there
that's here for 2023
you'll see a5.98
reduction of residents and that is to
the 712. So on the top you're looking at
two different budgets 2.3 I mean 4.2 and
4.3 for a total of 8.5.
They look at K12. So our ED12 is a
combination of our budget and RAM's
budget and it looks at only handover
residents for this ED12.
And so because RAM had a loss of
students on the bottom they say okay
we're recognizing a loss of 16.9
students and therefore that budget would
be able would be able to be reduced for
that minimum and you were in compliance.
Everything was fine. But I point this
out so that going into a budget season,
we have increased by, you know, 40 kids
over the years. And so the MBR every
year does go up anyways by a certain
amount.
Um if the MBR is not um taken into
consideration and a town passes a budget
that does not meet MBR, there could be a
loss of ECS dollars and ECS dollars,
which again is not necessarily something
that we talk about. It is in the audit.
know that it is in the revenue source
and sometimes we do say ECS dollars but
that's $2 million that comes into the
town for educational purposes. And I put
this in here because I do know that the
board of finance a couple years ago and
last year grappled with whether or not
that money was going to be the same
amount in planning. Um, and both myself
and Eric had mixed messages given to us
as a superintendent and a town
administrator about whether it was going
to be held harmless, but it is held
harmless. So, this here and next year,
thankfully, it'll stay at that 2.004
million. So, we can keep that in mind.
Now, I I I did reference an article in
here, not for any other reason, not to
say I can't believe somebody said that,
but I put it in here because I wanted to
point out that these things at a town
meeting aren't legal to go less. So, I
would ask that whoever the chairperson
is, Mark just said it won't be him.
Bless you.
>> Bless you. Um, when we make the
statement at the beginning from the
charter that says a reminder that you
can't add to at that town meeting, we
always remind residents you can't add to
it, but you can vote to decrease a
budget. I really think that it's
important so that we don't have people
riled up that we point out to them that
the school's budget it there is a a a
bottom point to that. It can't go below
what it was last year. so that a
resident doesn't make a claim or make a
motion for something that could get us
in trouble because that would have
gotten us in trouble had that one gone
through. We would have had a legal issue
with not meeting NBR. Um and then we
could have had a loss of ECS dollars.
So, I do think that that's important for
us to add that in there. Um I also would
um ask the board of finance and the
board of select committee because you
guys have been getting together to also
consider the fact that that number that
we put on the ED12 is what we say we
spent on educational dollars. So when
there's money that's been returned these
last couple of years from RAM, if it
gets put back into the general fund, we
do need to be cognizant of the fact then
that we haven't spent what we said we
spent on the ED12. If those dollars are
no longer educational dollars, they're
put back into the general fund and not
spent on education because if that
happens, we also could wind up in a
situation as a town where we're saying
we've spent it on education and we
haven't. So those are those are things
there. Now, if you looked at MBR too,
and this was important, I pointed out
our number of 500,000 on the front on
purpose because the formula they use
here for ECS, if you notice on the next
page, um this page that says on the top,
the basic ECS formula,
>> which which page are we on this?
>> Right here.
>> Yep. the very minimal that they use and
we all know that especially small towns
the poor people spending usually about
20,000
>> but hang on one second right there right
there
>> you got it um in the first paragraph
there is
>> the very minimum that they will use at a
state level is that 115
so I'm pointing this out because our
numbers have gone up in the past six
years by K6 because they only do K12 has
nothing to do with prek Okay, K6, our
numbers have gone up 40 kids. So, the
state would have adjusted our MBR.
They would have used that 115 formula
and they would have adjusted us 461,000.
So our number on the front page that I
gave you there of we've bought out
500,000 in six years is very much
aligned to what the state would have
said over these past six years is a
minimum minimum requirement. So, we're
not far off and I'd love us to be on the
same page when it comes to informing the
the taxpayers that in fact that is very
closely aligned to what they would have
said at the state with MDR. If you went
up 40 kids, we would look at that at
about 461,000.
>> So, with that said, still going through
my notes here. Sorry, I
>> have a question.
>> That's K through six, right? Kate. Oh,
yes. See, we've had 80 new kids, 40 of
which are K6.
>> So, so your increase, wait, your
increase is 40 children over how many?
>> Six years.
>> 40 K6 kids.
>> 406
kids total, Jeff, but K12 is all that
FBR looks at.
>> Okay. Because I I I mean I came to your
meeting the last day and I actually did
the analysis and went back to your your
records that you actually post online
for your and you only increase K through
six by five students over the last three
years. But that's all you post on your
website is just the last three years.
>> No, I I'll show you right here.
>> Take take the prek off.
>> No, we're good. So I think so can I just
say you said uh 40 kids from what year?
So the 20 2021 year or
>> the I I arrived in 2020 so I have
numbers in here. I'll show
>> you're saying 2019 2020.
>> Yeah. I I Yeah.
>> Okay. I I
>> I just want to make sure we're looking
at the same report.
>> Yeah, it's in here. Yeah. So the other
factors that are really important that
um I want us to consider on the next
page is insurance. Um I have been
disappointed that the insurance
consortium which the town itself is
signed up for our insurance consortium
has nothing to do with Baloro or the
school before I even arrived the town of
Andover was part of the consortium and
it's a great consortium and it is um
Heedron and the town of the school and
over the town over in the school marbor
the town of the school HM and Ram it's
those entities I
ask to be a part of it. We have to be a
part of it. The town has signed us up
for this. So it's not a situation where
the school can look elsewhere for
insurance. We must be a part of the
consortium. So I feel very strongly that
as a town then we're requiring my budget
to be part of that that we do need some
support for that and this year is a
tough year. I have been to all 70
meetings since I've been here in six
years and I've been a little
disappointed that only one time have we
had representation and I've asked for
representation because it's a tough
situation to go through all those
numbers and it's very important in board
of finance because if you look at my
$750,000
in insurance and Eric's insurance and
Ram's insurance this is 12% of the whole
town's budget.
Okay, it's like 1.2 2 million with what
we pay for uh the school for the town
and our portion toward the levy at ramp.
>> Is this health insurance?
Benefits, right?
>> Health insurance. Yes.
>> So, uh health and dental. Yeah. And I
ask one question since you brought it up
and I understand districts and towns
will shop around time to time. I
understand. However, the town is locked
in and the school's part of that. Yes.
Is there a number of years that it if
it's that big of a thing? Um
>> I mean it's I know that
>> the thing is is the insurance consortium
itself we have like said eight entities
that vote and the thing is is that as a
unit just like a board of finance board
of select or board of ed as a unit we
vote and so if at some point we need to
go elsewhere and look for something else
as a self-insured consortium we can do
that but it requires all of us at our
monthly meetings to be able to do that
and we have shopped for certain things
for stock loss insurance. We've, you
know, shopped over the years for things.
Um, in some years we fare very well and
we come in low and other years we come
in high. It depends on how many of the
members of the consortium are are high
and that's if it gets to ridiculous am
you know like you have you've given us a
good overview of it. I definitely dove
into insurance during you know the
budget season this year because I
thought that what we saw was a lot and I
don't take over your portion.
>> That's okay. So I'm just saying, you
know, so that the town has say it gets
out of control as it is for everyone.
They can't go elsewhere.
>> Well, so we have two votes.
>> You have to vote with the town, the
board of ed.
>> No, we we have two votes. So ramp
because of the number of people that are
insured gets two votes and then Heid
Town of Board of Ed, Andover Town of
Board of Ed, Marorrow Town of Board of
Edm. I might have forgotten them before.
So, those are the votes and we have
great I mean we have a great consortium
but I would love to have somebody from
the town there on our monthly meetings
because this is a lot of money like I
said it's 12%.
>> 12% otherwise I'm the only vote and I've
been the only vote you know for a very
very long time.
>> So um that's important to me because I I
think that when we come to you guys then
people don't understand I cannot change
that number in our budget. we are tied
to that consortium.
So, um, ABS, uh, we have $750,000,
um, and we have about four times the
number of employees on the insurance as
the town hall does. There's seven or
eight, Eric,
>> on the town's insurance.
>> Eight. Eight of them. Eight people.
>> Well, I think less than that, actually.
>> Yes.
>> Cuz we
>> Yes. We incentivize the hell out of
people not to take the town's insurance.
So we have I think currently either four
or five people that take fee in lie of
instead of the insurance.
>> So yeah. So when you're considering a
1.5 starting point, understand I put the
numbers here for me. We had a meeting
this past week and we were told that we
can anticipate 16 and 12% increase this
year for the consortium. Yes, I about
died. I thought, "Oh my goodness, I have
four times the number of people on the
insurance." And so the issue with that
then for the school's budget is if you
take 750,000
and you add 16.5% to that, we're looking
at a 2.5% increase to our budget with
nothing else different except to cover
our insurance. On the town side, you'd
be looking at a 0.04%
increase. So that's huge. That's apples
to oranges. It's no comparison. You
know, the town could easily easily, not
that they want to, but the town side
could easily be 0.04% in a budget, and
we can't. So, that's difficult.
Likewise, the largest part of any
school's budget has to do with our human
capital, has to do with our people. We
have a lot more employees. Again, there
are seven full-time employees on the
town side. We have a lot more than that.
We have, you know, again, that's the
largest portion of our budget. We're
talking about, you know, five times the
number of people that are there that are
employees. So again, if we look at this
with an average pay increase of 3%.
Contractual obligation to the size of
the school would be 1.5% right there. So
we are already talking about 1.5% for
contractual obligations and salaries and
2.5% if that insurance premium goes up
to 16.5%.
And again I have no control over the
insurance. I can't look elsewhere. Wish
we could but we couldn't. So, I also do
know that once Terry and I sit and and
we've only started to do this because
it's October, which is earlier, but when
we look at some of the changes, we've
had a lot of teachers have babies and
get married, which is all wonderful
news, but of course, when that happens,
we look at the insurance and say, "Okay,
they just went single to a family plan."
So when we do that and we consider the
increases that we know about, we also
know that we're looking at a total then
of 5% right there for just those two
things for the contracts and the
insurance. So we also did say last year,
everybody knows we've been saying it all
year that we will need that sixth grade
teacher this year. Um and so we
definitely said that last year. So when
you add those things in, we are looking
and that's nothing else because we've
just begun this process as you guys
know. It's October so we don't have
numbers and things. It's not apples to
apples. So this is this is big for us.
You know, it's it's it's difficult. I
understand that. But I think when we
look at the combination of the three
budgets, ours our means our our
expenditures do have to be looked at a
little bit differently. And the last
thing you know in my notes here for
because you said you wanted to look at
things in the projection for this next
year costs is that our budget our
operational budget is 100% expenditures.
So we do a budget and we know that from
day one to the last day of the budget
season that money is going to be money
in and money out. It's all on
expenditures. That's what our budget's
based on. We don't add any funds.
>> So there's no savings funds or things
like that. So to cut you're actually
cutting a bill that you know that you're
already going to receive. Where we are
different from the town because it's
happen to Orange is I'm not saying we're
the same is about 70 75% of a town
budget when you're considering what
their needs are. About 70 75% of the
budget is expenditures. Things that you
know for 100% sure are going to be
expended during the course of that year.
That's where they're different than us.
And then about a quarter of their budget
is funds. It's it's those savings
accounts for projects for later on,
which makes sense for a town, but I'm
just saying that's where we're not the
same. So when someone said you've got to
cut a a 1%,
sure it hurts, but you're cutting it
from something that is not 100% sure
already in expenditure during the course
of that year. So that's where we're very
different. So in considering those
things, I know there'll be a few
questions on this p last page too. On
the last page, this is available
obviously every month um at our board
meeting. This is the October 1st uh
enrollment. So this will back up our
MBR. This will back up the fact that we
are moving forward in terms of size.
This does show you that sixth grade need
currently in October. And it does show
you and I circled October only because
when the state looks at um enrollment,
they look at October 1st. So that's why
I um circled October and you can see it
was 175 back in 2020. Um and it's 247
now. If you minus the prek on the top
for MBR purposes on the right, you'll
see that's 186 K6ers.
Ram has 128 712ers.
So yep, we were up 72 kids by October of
this year. uh in the sixyear span 40 are
K6ers
and so that misnomer that we are way
overfunded I hope you look at the MDR I
hope you also consider the ECS dollars I
hope that you consider the fact that
there are some of these variables that I
can't control like insurance and I do
want people to see that when you look at
the K6 budget moving forward on the
bottom there that if you take our budget
and you divide it by our number of kids.
Why do I have 7,000 less than? So again,
um the question on here was looking at
future costs. Those are our future
costs, the salaries, the insurance, um a
lot of things that that we don't even
have on here yet. But for us to start
off in something that doesn't even cover
a lot of those other things. So I think
that these are things that I hope that
the board uh of finance and select will
consider. And Shannon, I don't think you
have anything to add. No, I just uh
great presentation. I was going to get
at exactly what you got under the second
to last page, which is I was part of the
contract negotiations
um for all of the the two different
certified and non-certified. Um we have
an average for both of them, which
frankly barely means cost of living
adjustment with all that's going on of
about 3% per year. Um, so if you take
both of those into account, um, it's 3%
across the board among basically all of
our employees. That's before we get out
of the gate and add in the insurance. So
when I heard 1.5, I I knew that was just
uh wholly unreasonable as far as our
ability to meet that goal. Um, we can't
do it based on our contractual
obligations as much as we would like to.
>> Can I ask a question?
So you got this sheet, right? This is
your student enrollment, right?
>> So in 2020 2021 on the 175,
>> there was no prek at that point in time,
right?
>> Yes, there was.
>> There was
>> there was prek. Do you want the number?
>> Um there when I arrived, we had um two
classrooms. Um they weren't completely
full, but we had two classrooms.
>> Okay. Can you get us that number?
>> Sure. as that would be helpful because
if I take the prek out and recurring
number I only get 11 student increase.
What? I'm sorry. What?
>> So, I used 247 because if I remember
correctly, in future previous
conversations, you had always told us
that prek would be self-funding and
self-supporting with grant funding and
tuition. And I don't remember it being
in place back in 2021. So, that's five,
six years ago because I only remember
>> PreK.
>> Yeah.
>> Oh, yes. PreK has been there since 2016
or 17.
>> All right. So, my my bad. I would I'd
like to know the number on 175 because
then that would tell me what to add to
the 11.
>> Um I I will make sure that during our
budget season that number that that
chart that's on the top that shows you
by grade
>> Yeah.
>> will be a part of every single one of
those presentations.
>> And and then one last question and
Shannon if you could and you went on we
get to the next board of education. You
only have three years of minutes. Um,
and I know that the board of ed keeps
the minutes at the school. Can you sit
there and bring up maybe that they
should be kept the town hall and the
town clerk's office when you fill up so
that if people want to go backwards and
look at minutes and see what happened in
previous board meetings that it's
available because we cannot go over to
the school and get that information and
the only thing I see online information
is that
>> excuse me
>> the information is available at the
school
>> at the school but you can't go over
there during the middle of the day.
We're responsible. We are responsible.
Um, if you look up any of the state
statues in terms of records, we are
responsible to keep those records for a
certain amount of time and to keep them
there. So, if you want your person to
make copies of anything, I'm more than
happy to open up whatever they need to
to make copies, but our our records are
are kept there.
>> No, I I do understand that. And I do
understand that other boards will sit
there and, you know, you have a book and
a binder and they're online. If they
were all online, this would not be an
issue. But they're not all online.
>> Well, where we're different, Jeff, is
that in a larger town, there's a central
office
>> and a central office for schools. It's
always kept there. Unfortunately, I am
central office, so they're kept where my
office is. So again, I'm really not
trying to be challenging, but if anybody
needs anything copied, they can come and
take them from where I would be
considered central office.
>> It it it would just be
>> easier. It would be easier if there was
a separate copy in the town clerk's
office.
>> Again, the town, if the town clerk would
like to copy them, I'm amendable to that
item. Okay. But our ours is stay with
us. Thank you. Y
>> if we were to ask for them via email,
would we receive them like in a PDF
packet?
>> Sure.
>> Okay.
>> Um tell us which ones you need. I
absolutely will get them for you.
>> Okay. I have a question. Um you
mentioned
are you expecting to hire expecting to
hire another teacher for sixth grade?
Now
>> for next school year for the budget for
next year.
>> So right now it looks like
>> we have 28 children right now.
>> Well, there's 25 children in sixth grade
or in fifth grade.
No.
>> Yes. There's
>> 25 children in fifth grade. So next
would be 25 because right now I I I was
looking at the the current enrollment.
Um because right now yes fourth and
fifth grade we did separate them and um
we that's our intent is to keep them
separated moving forward to keep two to
to keep two because once you merge the
back and you're looking at 25 to 28 or
29 kids we find that with this group of
fourth fifth and sixth grade kids and
the needs that it's it's it's a
necessity for us. It's a necessity to
have 25 children separated into two
classes. A grade six when they're going
to be moving on to a big this particular
group of children. Yes, we would have
done it last year, but we didn't need to
do it with this group of sixth graders
with the use of intervention. So, um,
keep in mind I do have a track record
here in the past six years of not only
saving money by combining classes when
the group of children allowed us to do
that. they didn't have a lot of needs if
you remember correctly. Um I had two
years of a two three combination rather
than adding an additional class because
with those children we could do that. It
wasn't the most ideal situation but we
made it work. We had a combination for
two years. Um last year with the sixth
grade that was there and the fifth grade
last year we did have larger classes um
last year. So for some students it
works. I do have, I think, a good
history of making sure that we meet the
needs of all the kids. And sometimes
having 28 kids in a class is not an
issue. Um, I'm not a proponent a
proponent of saying that class sizes
have to be very small. Um, I I don't
believe that. Sometimes they are too
small when you get uh, you know, to the
weeds of things. But I do believe that
we are ready to have that second class
next year for those kids and their
needs.
It's like a period before the grade
behind it, it's about 36, right? So, if
you're right, Robert, we kicking the can
for one more year at the expense of the
needs of these kids going into sixth
grade. Um and and we know Robert that
separating them for anybody who watched
Taylor's presentation at the board
meeting and you know I urge you during
the course of this year to watch more of
her presentations. Um we have already
seen in the first two months of school a
difference having those two fifth grade
classes. We've seen the we do the
beginning of the year benchmarks, the
middle of the year benchmarks, the end
of the year benchmarks. Those teachers
have already seen a difference with us
having those classes at a more
reasonable size. They're thriving as
opposed to last year. So
>> I sixth grade last year.
>> So you know
>> stories from
>> How old is your what grade is your
>> She's in seventh. She started red.
>> Yeah.
>> But um she had some things to say about
her class and Okay.
>> Yeah. So, so yes. So, and again, I like
I said, I do have a track record
>> of saving money when we can if it was
something that we could do with
emergency classes. Um, trust me, it
wasn't popular with parents when we had
to take the two three combo and we did
it for two years. I think Robert, you
had one that was was there at the time
as well. Um,
>> and it wasn't their first choice, but I
did explain to them, you know, how we
were going to meet the needs of the
kids. In fact, we did it for two years.
Um and it was appropriate to do it
during those two years um instead of
asking for another class. Um so you know
I I do stand by that sometimes. Sure. Um
you know 25 or 28 kids in a class is
appropriate. It just isn't with these
upper grades right now. Working in a
school too. We need to know it's not
just teaching the kids and preparing the
material every day. I mean, I personally
think 11 is too small because you want
socialization and that, but the phone
calls you get from parents, the the
followup, the meetings, everything you
have to prepare with for each individual
student. I would never believe anything
over 20. I mean, I think 25 is really
pushing it. That's just from being in a
school, taking all the phone calls,
knowing what these teachers have to
prepare each and every day. It's a lot.
So, if that's there. So
>> yeah, anything in the 20 over 20 for a
teacher, I don't know how you do it. But
>> you know, maybe there are, you know,
like you said, a group that don't have a
lot of needs or individuals or parents
that are calling every other day that
want to talk to the principal about what
the teacher's doing. There's that aspect
that we do need to bring into it, too.
You know, just from my experience of
working in a school system. But to that
point, Joanne, if you look, I know it
might be difficult this year for us to
say, "Okay, we're going to support the
school and we're going to do that. We're
going to as a group say that's what we
have to do is bite the bullet." But if
you look then at this enrollment, we'll
have taken that hit to go back to the
two in every grade. But then if you look
at the numbers, it'll be a very long
time unless we build huge projects in
Andover. It' be a very long time before
we would ever have to visit revisit I
should say adding a third class
someplace where years ago there were
three classes to grades when the numbers
were high in handover. And if you look
here, you'll see that that's not
something that would probably be in any
of our lifetimes. in looking at the
budget, we would have done that work and
we would have gotten to that point and
we would have the sufficient number of
classrooms for K6 and we'll be okay
then. You'll see that there's a lot of
room to grow then after that. So, we'll
be okay looking at that the following
year or years after that. So,
>> so if we go through this list, could you
could you just tell us so I can write
next to the the grades prek? How many
teachers are there?
>> There's four classrooms. So, there's
four teachers. series.
>> That's not part of his budget. That's
That's not a part of his budget.
>> Look at the second to last.
>> So there's there's one fourth grade.
>> No, there's four.
>> There's two
>> two
>> fourth grade classes each.
>> Oh, I see where you're at. And so each
one of these, so there's four teachers
on the first line and then two teachers
in each one of the other grades.
>> Correct. And you know what? I will
correct. I see down here never corrected
this and and and I've never noticed it.
So that's my bad too.
>> Um fourth and fifth, she never corrected
that um second to last. Right. Um
because it's only the second month of
the school year. So
>> but yes, there are two there.
>> Yeah. So it's two two and one in sixth
grade.
>> Correct.
>> And your goal is to have two in sixth
grade next year.
>> Yes.
>> And keep two teachers in all the other
grades.
Jeff, if I'm correct, and I'm I don't
know that I mean, we'll get you the
exact figures. When we first started
prek, and I don't know what it was by
the time of 2020 or so,
>> we had approximately
20 kids in it. Um, each classroom had,
you know, less than 10 when we first
started. We did have I don't know if we
went one immediately to two but we had
only two classrooms by the time Val
arrived in 2020. So if we take that and
it's 20 to 25 students in preK by that
point and we take out the 60 students
now we've had an increase of 30 35 to 40
students. So not the 11 you're talking
>> I'm not listen I'm not debating the
number that Valerie told us of 40. I'm
just trying to get to the number trying
to find my age.
>> Yeah. Because my end like we could come
and look at this Shannon and go in 2023
2024 we only had 206 students and the
next year we had 240 and that entire
increase that entire increase was prek.
>> No because follow Jeff follow that 206
in October
>> down to June.
>> Yeah. on on that sheet. I circled
October because the number that we have
to report to the state is an October 1
number.
>> But if you look from August to June,
every year we had kids come in here.
>> Correct. And I understand that and I can
live with 219, but the difference
between 219 and the 240 was all prek.
You had a huge jump in prek.
>> That was when we opened the
>> correct. You opened up and you did all
the competition and all that. So that's
why they're minus from my 186 up top.
>> And that's what we
>> have to look at.
>> Yes.
>> Any other questions?
>> Any other questions on the school
budget?
>> I have um your your sixth grade class.
So you want to split them up. Are any is
there a parah in that class right now?
>> There is not. What we do instead is um
there are uh academic subjects where the
team splits. So um the fourth, fifth and
sixth grade is in fifth and sixth grade
is in one wing
and there is a fourth classroom that is
used for Spanish and when it's not used
for Spanish, it is used to work with
other smaller groups. So this is where
we've been able to put a band-aid on
this for this year is for example when
they do math. When they do math there
are students that are at one need level,
there are students at another need level
and we have the math interventionist
that will work with students in one room
and the classroom teacher will work with
students in the other. So we're able to
right now split groups for certain
content areas to work in smaller groups
because a lot of those students have
those individualized needs anyways. But
it's not an ideal year. Um, and like I
said, this is the year that we are also
looking at those students that now in
the fourth and fifth grade um have been
split thanks to the fact that we got the
new fourth and fifth grade teachers
there and we're seeing them thrive and
so that's going to continue through
through next year.
>> So if the class is split, are you
planning on hiring pairs for the classes
split?
when you split the sixth grade class.
>> We don't hire paraprofessionals. Our
school does not have paraprofessionals.
>> Nope. We don't have regular ed parent
pairs.
>> Okay.
>> In our school, all of our par
profofessionals in our school and we,
you know, we we have a very small
percentage of parents in comparison to a
lot of neighboring towns. All of our
parents are hired for a specific need.
Maybe it's one child that they're hired
to work with. Maybe it's to accommodate
a few children that have a particular
need written into an IP or a 504. So
they might work with different students
um during the course of the day, but we
don't have in our building um any par
that is there just as a regular
education parah to work in a room
because a teacher has a lot of kids.
>> Okay.
>> Um
>> so you now have Okay. So the but the
preschool has they have four bears.
>> They do and that's not in the general
budget. That's the tuition, but that's
because the law requires that when you
have a certain number of students in the
prek room, you must have the parent
professional.
>> Got that.
>> Yeah.
>> But you hired extra pairs this year, I
think. How many do you have now in the
school? Just out of curiosity from six
parents in the K through six
>> in K through six, I believe. Yes, six.
>> And you're saying that each of those are
>> have assignments related to children?
Yes.
>> Yes. That's why the need for the second
sixth grade class coming up. If there is
a 504 student or if there is an IEP
student, um their document says what is
required for support. And so yes, those
six pair of professionals
>> are basically assigned to one student.
>> Not necessarily one student. They said
they're assigned to students that have
identified needs. they might have
identified needs for maybe certain
subjects. So,
>> so, so if you were a pair Liz, you may
be working in one classroom with one
student in the morning because it's the
math time and that particular student
requires support in math per their IEP.
Okay?
>> But then in the afternoon, you might be
assigned to another student and then
another grade completely someplace else.
Or that classroom has two or three
students in it that say they need
support during reading. No.
>> So, it's not necessarily you have one
student, but maybe there's three in that
grade and you're assigned in the
afternoon to go in and work with the
teacher because there's three students
that are identified.
>> So, you know, it it is I'm a former
special ed director. So, part of the
process
stands for individual rights educational
plan, right? So, yeah.
>> And then it's written the documents.
>> I No, I know you understand that. I've
never been
It's 8:00 now. I would like to move on
to the next section and if we have time
at the end, we can come back and have
more function.
>> The uh next up then is the board of
selectment and county administrator.
Identify major items and affect future
costs for the 26 27 budget year in
projected next five years.
Eric, if you want to take it since
you're still getting paid or you want to
do this?
>> Sure. So, uh, couple things that are
looming. One, we're notified that, uh,
the north northeast cog is no no longer
going to provide animal control services
that we have. Um, that's a little
annoying. Um, the reason why this is
critical is we're going to have to find
another town that's willing to take us
on as a shared service. And the the
reason why we don't just take it back
internally is that our animal control
holding facility is so far out of date
that we would be looking at building a
standalone building. Um, animal control
facilities are required to be air
conditioned. I'm sure that
>> um and there is an expectation from the
state that if there's not a full-time
monitor there, um there's at least a
part-time staff person assigned to the
animal control facility. And given the
number of animals that we take care of
on a yearly basis, that's a crazy, you
know, there's no way we're going to
devote one person, you know, have a
part-time employee down there every day.
Most of the days there's no dogs there.
So, that's that's something that we're
going to have to deal with as a shared
service. Um, as of July 1 of this year,
the new ASME contract uh will be uh we
will have a new um well, I'm not saying
we'll have a new ASME contract because
usually we don't end up negotiating them
until well after the year because the
union doesn't bother to negotiate with
us for that few employees. But there
will be a new ASME contract effective
July 1 of this year 26.
Correct. So, in terms of other things,
overall fuel and electricity both do not
seem like we're going to see major
spikes in them. Um, on the electrical
front, the legislature has been uh
hammering away at uh at utility company.
Um, which is kind of ironic because it
was mostly the legislature forcing them
to do energy efficiency product
projects.
um and accept a certain fraction of
nuclear power and other things which
drove the rates up in the first place.
Um not that I don't agree with the
intent of what they were doing cuz I do.
But it did have a big effect on
consumeris and they're backing off a lot
of that now. So I think that should over
the next couple of years stabilize our
electrical costs hopefully. Um if
anything they should be decreasing
slightly. Fuel costs obviously are very
uh volatile. Um you know we by switching
to propane we've reduced the overall
cost for fuel for the town hall
relatively considerably. And the town
hall now has the capability to be heated
and cooled both without those split AC
systems and with a uh a propane uh
boiler um at least on the heating end.
And we did that cuz that hedges our bets
on fuel costs. The propane's running
really high, you can use mostly ductless
splits. If propane, you know, stays
relatively low, it's more efficient to
run off the boiler in the winter. So, I
anticipate our costs for energy are
going to be pretty stable. Um, so from
the town's perspective, the biggest real
concern is capital projects because
that's that's essentially what the
biggest variability is in our funding.
Um, the two biggest dollar value
projects that we have going are Bunker
Hill Bridge, which is about 75% complete
at this point, and the bridge at Longill
Road, which will start next April. Um,
both of those are fully funded between
federal dollars and state dollars and
money from the Investment Jobs Act,
which is federal dollars. So those uh
those are in pretty good shape. We did
delay the replacement of the
culver/bridgeidge on Lake Road episola.
Um and hopefully we can make it another
year without um a significant failure of
that structure. Um you know the end wall
that is completely gone. Um, it very
definitely does need to be replaced, but
um, the engineer seems to think we can
drive over it for another year without
having a catastrophic collapse. So,
that's what we're doing. Um,
>> have to keep that in mind while I was
driving around.
That's about a million dollar project
for us, right? It's a 5050 grant.
>> Yeah. So, that's a 5050 state funded
project. We have been putting money away
in the bridge and culbert fund um
annually and as you noted in 2023 part
of the reason we saw a big increase on
the town side is we started increasing
the funding for capital projects
>> um to get more of those done. Um,
so by the time we do the bridge in 2027
at current funding levels, it won't take
an increase in funding. Um, you know,
but we will have to keep money into it
at that point. Um hopefully in about a
year and a half when we're substantially
completed with the Longill Bridge, the
money that we're currently using in that
fund can then be rolled into the next
culvert project. And to put it in
perspective, there are still six more
culverts that are rated poor or failing
um in the town of Andover, and most of
those are between half a million and a
million half dollars projects. So, we
are just simply addressing them at the
rate at which the public is willing to
give us funding and hoping to stay ahead
of catastrophic failure. Um, the only
one that's really failed completely is
the one on Hutchinson. Um, as many of
you know, that's been necked down to one
lane because the both lanes are not safe
anymore. So, we've neck that down to a
one lane road. Um, and it only affects a
few residents. So, that's really been
the push on the town side. Um, in the
bulk of the increase in spending on the
town side has been been capital funding.
Um,
can that be trimmed? It can, but it just
slows down the rate. Um, you know, and
for the most part, our goals have been
to stay ahead of major failure events.
Um, we have had some really good
successes. Um we
starting in around 2020 we considerably
upped the annual budget every year for
tree trimming. Um we've also been
incredibly successful with getting
Eversource to collaborate with us on
roots in town. So, if you look at it
over a 5-year period, um we put in about
$250,000
into tree trimming and we got a resource
to contribute around $400,000 to our
tree trimming down. And as most of you
have noticed over the last few years,
we've had very little storm related
damage in the town. Um, and I've always
judged it. We have 34 miles of road. The
rail trail runs through, you know, we
have 5 and a half miles of rail trail
and most storms today, we're getting
twice as many trees down on the rail
trail as we're getting on the whole rest
of our trail network or our whole road
network. So, we've been very successful
with that. Um the other thing frankly
that the town faces which everybody
faces is the cost increases in uh
equipment. Um when I look back in 2019
uh we bought a plow truck for uh around
$193,000.
>> The one that was purchased before that
was $137,000.
Um the one we bought after that was
$260,000
in a plot truck today is you know well
over 300.
In fact the last vehicle we got we
stopped by Peter builders which were a
better vehicle just simply because the
cost basis for buying them was was too
high. Um so it's on the you know the the
capital end. Um
we've kind of held public works to a
capital budget and that's been working
reasonably well. Um
you know the the cost of liquid asphalt
has stabilized the last two years. There
was a huge spike in it which really
drives the cost of paving but that's
leveled off the last couple of years
because that tracks very closely with
the cost of oil. Um so hopefully that
stays fairly stable. Um the goal is to
continue to shim and chip the remaining
roads that have not yet been shim and
chipped and there's about a quarter of
the town in that category. Those should
all be addressed within within the next
year basically. So we will have done one
cycle of leveling the roads and shipping
them. Um, the next big thing we're going
to have to consider doing is a chip seal
is a band-aid. You can only do that so
many times and eventually you have to
start, you know, either just repaving or
reclaiming and repaving. Um, and that's
an expensive proposition. Today, reclaim
and repave is about a half million a
mile and we have $34 million for 34
miles of road.
So, um, you can do the math. That's a
pretty expensive proposition to do. So,
at some point, we're going to have to
start switching over to a plan which is,
uh, less shim and chip seal and then
selective rebuilding roads. Um, you
know, we don't have a lot of roads that
were built properly from the ground up.
We're an old colonial town, so most of
these roads were cart paths. um you know
that that never really had a proper sub
base. So So that's the part of our
issue. Um we've done an awful lot of
work addressing uh drainage throughout
town. Um you know, we've had some pretty
major improvements. Um the next kind of
big project public works needs to tackle
in terms of road work is a uh
I'm killing me. It's the road.
Having a brain fart here. Um,
>> which way?
>> Sure.
>> The road off of Burnout Brook.
>> The road.
>> Um,
>> not Way Road.
>> Ridge Road.
>> Um, Ridge Road was poorly built. Um,
we've looked at the drainage
extensively.
I think we can uh rebuild part of that
road without the the good news is that
the the culverts in the road are
you know our concrete culverts
um and the pipes are concrete. It just
that the original design of the road was
really poor. Um we have problems plowing
it every year. Um, we break springs on
the plow truck every single year, uh,
plotting that road. Um, so that has to
be rebuilt and built correctly. Um, but
we're probably we probably don't have
the money right now to do a full reclaim
and repave. So, what we're going to do
is basically just reshape the bad parts
um, and then shim and ship the rest of
that. So, I think we can live within the
existing public works road work budget.
Um, the one thing I would say, I'm not
saying we have going for us cuz it's not
a advantage, but um because we didn't
have a public works supervisor for most
of the summer, we did not do the second
half of road work. So, we do have, you
know, a fair bit of money sitting in
that fund. Um, but remember, you know,
one mile of reclaiming one mile of road
in Andover would wipe out a year of our
road work fund. So, it doesn't get you a
whole heck of a lot. Um, we have several
other major capital projects that we are
uh in the works. The first is the
improvements at the athletic fields. Um,
so we currently have a half million
dollar steep grant. um for the pickle
ball courts, the new playgrounds, and a
pavilion and lighting for the pickle
ball courts. Um we were also able to get
a $250,000
legislative appropriation.
Um and we previously allocated money
from our multi-use filin fund, about
$150,000 for that. And we also got a
$10,000 Hartford Foundation for Public
Giving grant for that. Um, so that
project will take up every bit of that
money. Um, in fact, we've shifted some
of the work back from the contractor to
public works so we could get it under
the aotment that we had for that. So all
the money for that project
is either state grant funded or it's
money that the town has already put in a
capital fund. Um the next real big
project on the town's side, other than
that, there's two additional projects.
The first is the tear down of the old uh
firehouse/cenior
center and replacing that with a garage.
Um that project, we do have a state
grant to fund a portion of that. um town
meeting has already allocated some money
from the multi-use building fund and my
suggestion to the boards has been that
we use our LOIP state dollars to fill
out the rest of that and if we do that
that will not affect any ongoing
taxation and then there's kind of two
more big projects. Um the first is
finishing off the community center,
finishing off the basement, and then
secondarily
uh the generator that is located at the
fire department. Um that generator goes
back to 1990.
Um, so it is in need of replacement. And
one of the problems we've had in this
building up to this point is although
we're ADA compliant when we have power,
we're not ADA compliant when we don't
have power um because we don't have the
juice to run the elevator. So the goal
is to put in a single generator that
runs all three buildings. It runs the
community center. It runs this building
and it runs the firehouse at full
capacity. That allows us to use the town
hall as our emergency operations center,
which it is. Um, it allows us to use the
community center, um, as an emergency
shelter and keep operations going, and
it allows the fire department, uh, to
function. Now, currently, uh, we're
awaiting word on whether we've gotten a
legislative appropriation from the
federal government. Um, we've asked for
around $300,000
from the federal government and it made
it through the Senate Appropriations
Committee. Um, but it made it through
the Senate Appropriations Committee last
year, too, and then they didn't fund any
appropriations. So politically, it's
anybody's guess whether they're going to
come to some kind of agreement, pass a
budget, and fund appropriations
um or not. So if we get that funding, we
would use that funding plus an
additional $250,000
in state legislative appropriations that
we got uh that we will have as of July 1
next year. So, the good news is the
three big projects that we have rolling
right now um are funded from either town
money that taxpayers have already paid
into permanent funds or state or federal
dollars. So, we've been pretty
successful with that. Um and then the
last thing that's hanging out there is
the multi-use pathway. Okay.
>> Can I sorry to interrupt you the the
whole generator linking the three
buildings for that project. How much is
the total cost for something like that?
>> Uh the generator alone is about 300k
something like that. Um cuz it's fairly
large generator. Now, we've already kind
of prepped everything and that when we
built the community center, we paid for
ahead of time and we put in all the
conduit for the electrical and we ran
gas line buildings and we have a gas
line and we put the extra two propane
tanks. Um, and we have an interlock
between us and the fire department. So,
most of the year the fire department
fills their tanks, we fill our tanks. In
an emergency, there's a valve that opens
all four tanks so we have full capacity
from the generator to back up all the
buildings. Um, so we've done all the
pre-work and we will have installed the
automatic transfer switches in the
community center and in here. Um, but
it's still an expensive project to uh to
do.
>> The funds you said you were taking it
from, that's why I'm like I need to know
how much this whole budget.
>> Yeah. No, it's it's no pressure. and
then to finish off the basement of the
community center. And that's going to
kind of depend to some extent on the
board of select and making final
decisions
hopefully in conjunction with the
community center staff as to what
exactly they want to program that for
because how you finish it off is kind of
dependent on what you're going to use it
for.
>> And that's in future years. You're
giving us an overview of projects, not
just this upcoming year. Correct. Uh, so
if we get the federal legislative
funding, I would assume we would go out
to bid um sometime
late May, early June. Um, assuming that
we have the state funding sometime after
July 1 and that would be a project done
following next year. So next budget
cycle.
Um, and the last thing is the uh
multi-use pathway that connects from
here down to the rail trail. Um, so
we're a little bit stalled out on the
design. We would need to come up with
and budget roughly $100,000 to complete
that design. Um, we did apply for what's
called lots, which is a
transportationbased
funding from the Department of
Transportation that's passed through the
Capital Regional Council of Governments.
So, we have a uh $2.9 million
essentially construction funding
uh that we've already gotten. Um, we've
gone through the first rounds of
comments with DOT. We've addressed them.
we need to send it back and get their
final commitment to fund letter, but we
already have a preliminary commitment to
fund letter. Um, the way those programs
work is we're on the hook to do the
design and and then we can 100% fund the
cost of construction. Uh the other good
thing about uh the capital regional
council of governments is that
uh if the price increases because you
know
we did that we submitted that a year and
a half ago based on prices at the time.
Uh the COG is pretty reasonable about
accepting price increases for projects
like we may get comments back from the
DOT um and they may require us to do
improvements for for them for Route 316
um which drive the price up. If that
happens, we can go back to the CRO with
the expectation that they will increase
the budget for that project. And I
remember asking you about that
particular project because that's a
biggie at our meeting when you presented
on our last meeting. That one's in the
future because there's so many things
that have to happen.
>> And I I mean I know this is
>> Yep.
>> You know,
>> if you're lucky
>> probably I mean you you liked this and
have been
>> into that. But so you said we had
100,000 that would be to finish the
design element of it.
>> Yeah. Is that the full cost of a design
or is that
>> No. So, I don't want to take
>> So, I secured a $100,000 legislative
grant a couple of years ago
>> and I used that money to do uh
essentially the big picture design, pick
a pathway, um and then produce a
preliminary design to go for funding.
Um, and then I had a bunch of money left
over and I applied that money towards
the design and survey work. So the
$100,000
in truth, uh, that's probably closer to
$200,000 in design work. Okay.
>> Um, but a h 100,000 of that would have
already been a legislative
appropriation. Um there's a second
pathway back through here which I know
is going to take cooperation from a lot
of entities. We've uh let out the design
contract for that that also went to town
meeting. Um that's a 20% town match and
roughly an 80,000. And I suspect that
design will take about a year. Um, and
if the town was smart in a year, you
would turn around and apply to lots of
funding because you would have a
full-blown design and if you got
full-blown, if you got lots of funding,
that would be 100% on construction. So,
you could theoretically do that without
spending a dime on hand over tax
dollars, which is usually my objective.
So, that's what we've got going for
projects. So, we are spending a fair bit
of town money. I'm not going to deny
that. But we're also spending millions
in state and federal dollars, too. So,
we're getting an awful lot done for what
we're spending.
>> That's it. Unless you have other
questions for me.
>> Any other questions for Eric?
>> Thank you. Thank you for all your hard
work and getting all those grants. And
>> I know
>> we have other problems with the town
that we're going to at the board of
finance. Eric leaving
uh leaves a huge hole and we have to
determine as to how we're hiring. So the
goal will be to go out and get
an interim town manager, town
administrator,
but how we sit there and look at the
position moving forward is going to be
different because there's got to be
discussions as to the compensation that
is paid on that position. So right now
it's at one level. We may not be able to
get a qualified person at that level. We
might need to make some adjustments, but
that's also something that has to be
taken in council. When you look at next
year's budget, you're going to have
potentially an increase at that level.
Um, also, uh, one of the priorities that
the board of of of selectman has is the
community center and it's maximizing
the, uh, availability of the community
center and what benefits are leveled for
the seniors and for the rest of the
community as far as using that building.
Um,
I would hope we would come to you guys
with some plan as to what we could do to
sit there and make better use of that
building and like I said, extend the
hours because that's really the biggest
issue for me. Uh, to make as much use of
it as possible and Eric's done a great
job of getting funding to sit there and
finish off the building. So, as of right
now, the kitchen is not complete because
we don't have the hood in place, but
we're going to sit there and work to get
that done. Once the kitchen is done, all
the lunches can sit there and be uh
dealt with out of that building, and it
can also be used for rental purposes.
So, we have a senior center and
community center to uh consider. So
those two are the two things from my end
because reality is from a town level we
have been very conservative as to how
much money we're spending. I don't think
anyone can sit there and look at the
town level and go uh it has increased
because we've added additional employees
or we've added a significant amount of
services. The only thing that has been
added from that perspective is one
additional person in public works, which
I think is extremely effective and has
gotten more done for the town in the
last five to six years than has been
done in the past. And then the employees
over at the community center. There
hasn't been any increase in staffing
levels at the town hall and there hasn't
been any increases at the library. So
those really are only our two increases
from an employee base for the town.
agree or disagree, Erin, from what I'm
saying to you?
>> Yes. Over the last six years, we've
basically shifted a series of
um town hall staff to part-time. So,
we've reduced town hall staffing overall
is,
you know, significantly lower than it
was six years ago. We have added staff
to public works and we have added staff
to the food settlement. Okay. And so
from from that standpoint, I don't think
anyone in the community can sit there
and think that we are
going to the board of financing asking
for any significant level of increase
that hasn't been justified as to the
service level that you receive as as
taxpayers. So if not, I'd really like to
know about that. So um but you are we
are going to come because we are going
to have problems replacing Mary. It will
not be an easy situation and it will be
financially
impactful for the town and we're all
going to have to get together and
understand that if we want to keep
moving forward because my fear with the
community is that
um you know chaos in every organization
causes problems. We can see it at every
level of government. We can see it in
any business. You have chaos in your
organization, you cause problems. We've
had a slight bit of chaos within our
boards and within our town. And it's
caused problems. And if you all can't
see it, you just look at Eric's
resignation. It's number one on my list
of things that I knew were coming that I
didn't want to see ever happen to this
town while I was sitting here. So, I am
telling you, we have problems, you know,
and I'll go through it. We've lost our
Department of Public Works director.
We've we've lost our our maintainer, our
best maintainer, our oldest maintainer.
We are intend we're going to lose our
treasurer. Okay, we'll sit there and
deal with that. And we have other
positions within this town because of
some of our chaos self-induced that we
have to deal with. But really, we need
to sit there and be really cognizant of
the fact and work together as boards.
But one thing, you know, I I
participated in the board of education
meeting and I understood that there was
there's freedom of information requests
being pos positioned back and forth
between departments within this town.
That should never happen ever. I was so
disappointed when I found out that the
treasurer sat there and gave the the
board of education a Freedom of
Information request for information. I
understand what the treasurer might be
after, but submitting a freedom of
information request against another
board or a town group is not okay for
me. And that the board of education in
turn sent freedom of information
requests to the town is not okay for me.
And so I am just telling I'm telling you
all as boards, we either work together
and share all of the information so that
we can make good decisions or we're
going to have bigger problems. And I'm
just letting everybody know those big
problems are coming. And one of the
things we have this disconnect on
capital projects and listen, I won't
even go into that. I'll just sit there
and tell you every board needs to
understand what that board's
responsibilities are. every board, even
my board, we need to sit there and take
the time to understand what our
responsibilities are. So, we we we we do
play in our roles. We respect the other
groups. We do what they they need to do
what they need to do, and we need to do
what we need to do. But every board has
to understand where they're at. I look
at my board as we are the group that
sets the priorities for the town and we
sit there and come up with a budget for
capital projects and we come up with a
budget to operate the town and do the
basic work that the town needs to have
done. We walk that budget to the board
of finance. You guys determine if that
budget is acceptable for what you can
raise in taxes from the community.
Right? You sit there and say these
things are good or these are bad and we
then take it back and we work within
those parameters of what you're given.
Eric has done a phenomenal job of
working within what the board of finance
has provided us to provide levels of
service that are acceptable for the
community. Right? But I will sit there
and tell you as long as we understand
all of our roles, we'll all work
together as easily as possible. And we
should never ever if I hear of another
Freedom of Information request going
back and forth, I will be so
disheartened because that's not how we
should work. Great. Share the
information and even if you get what you
don't consider to be
a a reasonable answer, maybe some board
is unreasonable and they do, we all work
with it. It's not it's not a negative. I
I don't take it as a negative, but
sharing information and understanding
what we're after is really critical as
this town moves forward. And it's
really, you know, from a town's
perspective, board of select
perspective. I cannot tell you how upset
I am at the changes that have occurred.
And Eric, I do thank you for all you've
done, for all the grants that you've sat
there and got for this town and all the
work that you've done to try to sit
there and and make us better off than
when we had a first selectman sitting in
this chair. And I thank you for not
making me do it
because I will tell you and this is what
everybody in this town needs to
understand. There will be people coming
and saying, "Let's change the charter
again and get away from the town
administrator."
Do not do that.
>> That would be disaster.
>> It would be an absolute disaster.
>> It will be steps backwards like you
cannot imagine.
>> We're already losing
knowledge here.
>> You didn't even touch on it, but you
know, we're gonna chair and vice chair
>> from November. I listen those are that's
the board of finance right there too. So
>> it takes so long to just get the
knowledge you know that you learn but
Jeeoff I like that you brought it
forward that you want to look at the
position. I feel like Eric in his role
had to do so much, you know, like and I
mean we
>> we are we're too small to ask for what
I'm saying they're saying you're not
going to get multiple people in your
position. You're going to get one
person. Well, what we have to decide is
what type of person does the electoral
come to? that I already know in my head
it's either it's either we overpay
>> and we pay more and get more in a in a
reasonable
>> range because Eric what were you in
position you've always you've said it to
me multiple times what how far down on
the pecking order are you telling
administrators Tom
>> I'm pretty sure I'm the lowest paid one
in the state
>> that is because the board of finance
does a damn good job
we negotiate It's just we negotiated
toward Eric negotiated on it's bad. Um
so we have a problem.
>> Yeah.
>> And just understand that the the the the
opportunities are raise the pay
on pay, you know, maybe reasonably close
to what we're doing and get a less
qualified individual. And and honestly,
I will sit there and just tell you
it probably took you what, two years to
get good at it?
>> At least
>> I don't know that I'm good at it.
>> No, you you are very How long did it
take you to get reasonably comfortable
in the position?
>> A while. Couple years.
>> Couple years. To me, it was a couple
years.
>> First,
>> well, but remember the the first problem
was we had a public works that was
disaster. So I spent the first year
essentially being the public works
supervisor until we could get an actual
public works supervisor and that killed
an enormous amount of time. Um, you
know, so that was a structural problem
we had at the time, you know, and and
frankly that occurred because at some
point the board of selectmen decided to
get rid of the public works supervisor
back when there was a five to six person
public works department and the only way
they could do it without uh running a
foul of the law was to eliminate the
position. So they took uh the most
senior uh public works employee at the
time and said, "You're now the
supervisor." Um and that was that was
frankly a disaster. He was a great guy.
He worked his ever loving butt off for
the town, but he couldn't use a
computer. He couldn't use a smartphone.
He couldn't send texts. Um he couldn't
use email. Um, and that's who we had
running public works for, you know, 10
years. Um, you know, and at the same
time, the board of selectman wasn't
investing in equipment. So that killed a
specific once I had that off my plate
and I had a public works supervisor in
place that could run that cuz that is
the biggest single department and
expense, you know, on the town side.
Then it was pretty quick. I just needed
to free up the time.
>> That's what I meant about you doing too
much. I think your knowledge is
extensive of the town and like the land
and like rules and you know that there's
the management part and the financial
part and then the public works part. You
were involved in all of that. So you
probably brought it to the point where
when you have those structures at the
top like Jeff says like if you how many
people are in your public works
department right now? I feel like the
town has lost so many employees.
>> Uh if we're back up to we're four today
as of November 3rd, we will have a new
public works supervisor staff
>> because I know you probably have. So you
have that, but then you have the
treasury finance side, you know, and
then you like overseeing it with your
Yeah.
>> But you were in all the ground roots
parts too, like on the roads and
>> you sat here and listen to Eric tonight
like we have at every board finance
meeting, right?
>> Go through the administrator's report.
It's mindboggling
what the knows and does every week, the
hours he puts in. People have no clue
what we have compared to the old days.
Um, this man's knowledge, just what he
reported to all of us tonight. Yeah.
Deep right now is the best way to
put it when he's gone because it's going
to take a long time to fill those shoes.
I don't know if anybody gets that, but
I've listened to what he's done, the
reports that he gives at every board of
finance meeting and my head just spins
that he knows and had a grasp of all of
this. So
>> without
>> good lotion time and no burning
>> usually without
those people who you know complain about
air or this that and everything didn't
go along with them they don't know what
he does they know all the hours that he
put in them a week. So the other thing
I'd like to chime in about with what
Jeff was saying about you know how he
pays to staff this position. We had a
prior administrator I don't know how
many people were here I was on the
board.
>> Yeah it was it was a while back now.
people may have kind of forgotten
because CO was in between and screwed up
time, but that didn't work out. Let's
just put it that way. Um, and we didn't
pay we didn't pay a lot and we got
someone who frankly couldn't do the job
and we had to move on and luckily we
flipped into Eric. But, you know,
>> no, we we compromised
>> to be really honest. I don't know if you
know that Eric was elected to the board
of select and we compromised because
we we as a board worked together to put
what we thought was the best possible
person into that position understanding
that he did not have the true
qualifications that were even written
into what we were doing to be the town
administrator. But we understood
his character and what he was bringing
to us. And we as a board understood
there would be growing things. So we
have to understand that as a town we
could try to do it this way and go
through growing pains again, rego
through what we did and maybe not get
the right result or we could try to over
compensate, give additional compensation
to that role and try to get somebody
with a the better qual not not not
better than Eric but more qualified than
>> you can get a better administrator than
me. I have no doubt about that. I see in
some of my peers capabilities that I
don't have. Um
>> do you have any recommendations or
setcommendations?
>> Yeah, but what he's going to tell you
next is how much money you have to pay
to get
>> right. But you're not you know the the
town just has to understand that if you
want that you're going to have to pay
for that. Um, you know, and you're going
to have to search nationally. Um, you
know, the the job I interviewed for in
Dalton, I think there was only one out
of the five interviewed candidates that
were from Massachusetts.
Um, they did a nationwide search. They
pulled people from plenty of states to
make their decision. Um, and that's what
you have to do today. you there is there
are too many
there are too few administrators and
there are too many positions open and
you're competing against all the other
towns
>> and unlike Connecticut most of the towns
north of here most of the cities have
town manager forms of government even
very small towns I mean Waterville New
Hampshire is a population of 850
um their town manager makes quite quite
a bit more than I make here. Um,
you know, you just got to antie up if
you're going to be competitive in that
particular market or you have to try
something unusual, which is what the
board did with me. And maybe that'll
work, maybe it won't.
>> This is an unusual town, though, too. I
have to say from living in other towns,
there's never been a town like this with
so many opinions, so many people getting
involved, so much venom being spewed all
over the place, people being not
respected in meetings, people. So, we
all have people talking things behind
people's back when you think things are
fine. I mean, there's a lot of ugliness
in this town. Let's be real. I hope they
antie it up and I understand what you
want to run this town. There's not a
there's also some real bad things that
go on in this town that it's so small.
>> I don't think
>> it's so small for and against people
that give of their time and their free
will.
>> We are all volunteers. Absolutely.
>> We all volunteers, but a lot of
volunteers like to throw stones.
>> So, you all have to understand that if
you're going to be in this position,
>> negativity.
>> Yeah. Well, you know what I like is data
and information. And if I can get the
data and information, I as a business
owner and even though this is not a
business, I can make a business
decision. I can give you what is right
for the community.
>> Right? It might not be right for a given
department and I respect that and I can
listen. You know what I have a problem
with really and I will tell you my
managerial style. I let everybody go.
You do what you want, right? I can
handle bad news. You tell it to me to my
face. I can sit there. I can sit there
and live with with bad news. I cannot
live with people lying.
>> And I cannot live with people not giving
me everything that they should be giving
me. That's my that is my that is my end
all beall in my work in my life. I can
respect a bad bad decision. I can
respect that you made a mistake. Just
tell me. be forthright and don't make me
go dig and do other things that I have
to do. So in this town we do like to
throw stones. There's been a lot of back
back channeling. Back channeling causes
chaos. Chaos is incred has ensued.
>> I'm just
>> No one listen. No one listens. No one
listens. I don't know how we get back.
>> Sorry. Sorry.
>> That was just It needed to be said. I
like the fact that there's a love fest
for
>> but but I I get where we're going and I
do think it's important that we work
together. We're transparent. It has to
happen.
>> Professional
>> not going to work.
>> But let me be clear. I didn't believe
the town is over because of the salary.
I left the town over because of the
chaos.
>> Okay.
>> And that has to be understood by the
rest of the community.
>> Yeah. That's sad. I'm sorry that was
very sad.
>> Okay. Well, I think we I think we have
shifted to board open discussion.
>> You did.
>> And u any other topics that we should
include under
>> Well, while we're talking about clean
people, um I think we have significantly
underpaid our town clerk for many, many
years. Um and that may eventually affect
us as well. Um I know for a fact that
there were many years when our county
clerk went without um an increase in
pay. Um and I think that may have
affected a decision there. I don't know.
Um but I think we're we're looking at a
comeuppance there as well at some point
to have qualified people.
>> It's an elected position.
>> I know it's an elected position. We also
have to pay or we're not going to be
able to fill the position. If it was
appointed, I would 100% agree with you,
Shannon. But because it's an elected
position, it has little different
parameters. That's not to say we
shouldn't try to pay a reasonable
salary, but it is a difference. If if we
had gone through the charter revision
and we sit there and had to appoint a
town clerk, I would tell you flat out
we'd have to be raising the
compensation. Yeah.
>> No problem. But because it is an elected
position, that's less of a problem. It's
less of a problem. We lost an assistant
clerk over that very reason. And
>> we lost the assistant clerk because she
couldn't take the position.
>> No, another one. Never mind.
>> Okay.
>> Any other
>> Are you Wait, are you talking the
assistant Tom Clerk or the Tom?
>> Assistant Tom Cler.
>> The assistant Tom Clark. Okay. So, you
said the town clerk. So, the assistant
>> I said No, you said Tom Clark.
>> She said I heard assistant assistant was
the second time. The second time I only
got two more.
>> So we have raised that salary
considerably.
>> Pardon?
>> I said so we have raised that salary
considerably.
>> This is just we have
>> finally they said they did at the last
meeting.
>> It was
>> any other board open discussion
relevant to the budget development
process?
Please be please be consistent with what
your requests are for all departments
and hold the town accountable to what
you're asking them for and what you're
requesting and and I am so sorry and I
am going to attend your meetings. You
guys have to ask questions if you don't
ask questions of every board of every
group and all and I will point to the
board of education. If you don't ask
questions of the board of education as
to how there's and they they need to
educate our children properly but you
have to ask questions. Don't be mean but
ask questions.
>> Okay. Anything under correspondence?
No correspondence. Not this one.
>> We move on to public speak. Any guess?
>> I'm gonna come over here so that I can
be on camera.
>> A few things to say. Um,
see if I remember all these things
because I didn't take any notes. Um,
first on the subject of the uh, board of
education and the accessibility of the
meeting minutes that you talked about,
Val, I heard what you said about
maintaining the records and following
the procedures and I appreciate what
what what you informed us on, but this
is 2025 and not 1925. And the
expectation is that within a reasonable
time period, those records are going to
be scanned electronic and available
online. Jeff, I think you need to decide
how far back that needs to go in a
reasonable c. You brought it up the
she's rules and requirements,
>> right? Let me let me just finish what
I'm what I'm thinking here. You have a
requirement you that that you need to go
back a certain amount of time. you
should define that. And then whether
it's the board of selectmen, whether
it's the board of ed, whether it's some
volunteers that we appoint, we take
those records and we digitize them and
get them online because that is the
modern expectation for any public
meetings for any public records, not
that they sit in the filing cabinet
somewhere, that they are available 247
electronically just like every other
meeting is. So that's that's the first
point that I that I want to make. Um,
the second also having to do with the
school and this is just more for
historical purposes and a little
perspective. You've been here six years
I believe you said and at one point you
talked about the population in the
school and how it was a certain size and
we're never going to see that size
within our lifetime. When my son entered
kindergarten in 2010, same year that uh
Jeff's daughter entered, a year later
after after Shannon's son, there were
about 330 kids in the school. The
standard cohort was three classes in
each grade. I think I remember there
being one grade that had four classes.
Um, seven years later, and there was no
prek at the time, so this was all K
through six. Seven years later when
Michael graduated in 2017, his was the
last cohort of three classes and we were
down to somewhere around 200 um 210
somewhere around there for for the
school population. The population hit
its nater I think about six or seven
years later at about 170 if I remember
right and now we're back up to
>> 240
>> 250
>> 250 is that including prek or okay what
is it without prek just
>> or 190
>> 190
>> 190 okay so most of the growth that
we've seen in that inter intervening
time has been prek it hasn't been
through
>> yeah okay so I just want to point out
that this precipitous drop 50% happened
in seven years or so
from 330 students down to
below 200. Okay, that when it when it
hit hit its bottom. Um so or maybe a few
years later in a decade. Okay, so it is
altogether possible. I don't know what
socioeconomic factors would take but it
could happen within our lifetime. So
just you know if if history has shown us
anything it's that we can't predict
history.
>> So comments about school. Now I want to
switch over to Eric for a moment. Um
>> and you need to start wrapping it up.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Okay. Um I just want to ask and
from the 10,000 foot level when it comes
to to roads, let's stay out of the
weeds. How long does a road last in this
town? What's the operational lifetime
for one being put down new to the time
it needs to be wholesaled and paved? Is
it 20 years?
>> Um, if you start with a good subbase and
you pave two courses on a road, in other
words, you start from like
roughly 20 years before you're going to
do a major reconstruction unless you're
doing intermediate pavement
preservation, which is the goal. and 34
miles of roads. So if we were to just
stretch it out linearly, we'd need to do
a mile and a half of roads a year.
Just in rough numbers,
>> need to reconstruct.
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> Yes.
>> And it's half a million dollars a mile.
>> Correct.
>> Okay. So you're talking threequarters of
a million dollars a year just to keep up
with the roads.
>> But that's not including the
preservation you would be doing.
>> Yeah. in the same
>> just pointing out it's a lot of money
>> and it's a sustained kind of predictable
expense over decades.
>> Okay. And last, um, again, well, this is
board of selection, but pertaining to
Eric, my understanding of how you
replace somebody like him, at least the
way that it's done, been done in the
past, is that you impanel committee
within the town, a recruitment and
hiring committee, and you go through the
process. Um, I've heard it mentioned by
more than one person that that's
something that can be outsourced to
professionals, that there are
professional recruiting organizations.
That's expensive, but it may be another
um approach for you guys to consider.
So, and I think I covered everything.
>> Thanks, Bob.
>> Thank you.
>> Any other public comments?
>> Yes.
>> Oh my god, we're going to miss Eric.
This is all coming a little too late.
>> Any other public comments?
And I had one and I was expecting, you
know, a lot of good information from
Valerie on on the school budget thing.
What I didn't hear was capital
improvements and and that's you maybe I
missed it in there somewhere but you
know last year we heard that we were
looking for bathroom elevator and pave
the driveway and I didn't hear any of
that in the discussion that I was
>> um the elevator's been done during the
course of this past year um the driveway
was put off so we are going to put it
off again as Eric mentioned there's lots
of road discussions that need to take
place so At one time they discussed
doing our driveway at the same time as
the driveway down here. So, um, and then
the bathroom was funded already. Like a
lot of the town projects, that money is
sitting there. So, that shouldn't I'm
glad you mentioned it, um, Jen. That
wouldn't be something that we would be
adding in addition to our operational
budget this year moving forward as we
see it. So,
>> but do we have are we looking five years
out? Okay.
>> We are. Um, I did just receive, we
talked about this at the board meeting
this week. I did just receive um the new
capital uh template from Eric. Um thanks
for doing that before you left. Um and
so I will uh continue to create the
schools using the same template at our
board meeting. I had presented the fact
that I have started that with a couple
of sub areas and it'll follow the same
exact um model as the one that we
received this week from the town. So
that moving forward um the boards will
have that and it'll be all inclusive.
the towns and the schools.
>> Okay. Thank you.
>> You're welcome, Jim.
>> Any last minute public comments?
Looking for a motion to adjourn. Motion.
>> Second. Second. Okay. All in favor?
>> I I
Thank you very much.